feat: enhance validator section intro (#2771)
near/docs: docs/protocol/network/validators.md

description: "Learn about NEAR Protocol validators, their roles in network security, consensus mechanisms, validator economics, and how to become a validator."
---

At its core, NEAR Protocol is a decentralized blockchain that operates on a network of independent participants called validators who process transactions and secure the network.

> These validators must reach consensus—meaning they need to agree on which transactions are valid and should be added to the blockchain. This ensures no one can steal funds, double-spend tokens, or manipulate the system. The method validators use to reach this agreement is called a consensus mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These validators must reach consensus, meaning they need to agree on which transactions are valid and should be added to the blockchain. This ensures no one steals funds, double-spend tokens, or manipulates the system.
```

> NEAR Protocol uses [Proof-of-Stake (PoS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_stake), a consensus mechanism that secures the network through economic incentives rather than energy-intensive computational power. Unlike Bitcoin's [proof-of-work](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_work) system that requires massive amounts of electricity, PoS makes the network environmentally sustainable while maintaining robust security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEAR validators use [Proof-of-Stake (PoS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_stake), a consensus mechanism that secures the network through economic incentives rather than energy-intensive computational power. Unlike Bitcoin's [proof-of-work](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_work) system that requires massive amounts of electricity, PoS makes the network environmentally sustainable while maintaining robust security.
```
